2020 Fonts chapter (#1643)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2020/fonts.md

#featured_stat_label_3: TODO
unedited: true
---
## Introduction

Text is at the heart of most web sites, and typography is the art of presenting that text in a way that's visually appealing and effective. Creating good typography requires choosing the appropriate fonts. Web fonts give designers a tremendous range of fonts to choose from. As with all resources, there are performance and compatibility concerns, but done right, the benefit is well worth it. In this chapter, we'll dive into data to show how web fonts are being used, and in particular how they're optimized.

Web font technology has been fairly mature, with incremental improvements in compression and other technical improvements, but new features are arriving. Browser support for variable fonts has become quite good, and this is the feature that's seen the most growth in the previous year.

## Where are web fonts being used?

> Web font usage has been growing steadily over time, with 82% of web pages for desktop using web fonts, and mobile at 80%.

Reviewer: Suggest "over time (it was zero percent as late as 2011),"

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=1465601804&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655527383",
  sql_file="04_01.web_fonts_usage.sql"
  )
}}

Usage of web fonts is fairly consistent around the world, with a few outliers. The charts below are based on the median number of kilobytes of web fonts per web page, which can be an indicator of lots of fonts, large fonts, or both.

https://discuss.httparchive.org/t/how-does-web-font-usage-vary-by-country/1649

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-web-fonts-usage-by-country.png",
  caption="Web fonts usage by country.",
  description="A map of the world showing the amount of web font usage for each country, measured as median kilobytes of web font data.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=1005874204&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655527383",
  sql_file="04_02.web_fonts_usage_by_country.sql"
  )
}}

> The single top country is South Korea, which is not all that surprising given their consistently high internet speeds and the fact that Korean (Hangul) fonts are almost an order of magnitude larger than Latin. As we'll see in the "popular typefaces" chapter, Korean fonts are two of the top 14 most popular, further evidence they really like web fonts. Web font usage in Japan and Chinese-speaking countries is considerably lower, likely because CJK fonts are even larger and connections are not as fast.

Reviewer: High speeds and low latency (the latter being more important as speeds drop).

Reviewer: "because CJK fonts are even larger" can't really say that Chinese, Japanese and Korean fonts are even larger than Korean :) 

Suggest instead "because Chinese and Japanese fonts are vastly larger (the median font size being 10,000 times larger than the median Latin size).

Reviewer: Suggest adding "This means web font usage in Japan is very low, and usage in China is effectively zero. Although [recent developments](https://www.w3.org/TR/2020/NOTE-PFE-evaluation-20201015/) may make web fonts usable in both countries, within a couple of years."

Author: 10,000 times larger? I don't see how that can be. I'm going to put "over 100" in as a placeholder for now, but can refine it based on data.

Reviewer 2: @raphlinus I think 1,000x is safely on the mark (at least): I've seen many CJK web fonts in the 20MB+ range for a single instance. Might be reasonable to say 'on average several hundred times larger' to emphasize the scale of the difference.

Author: How do we feel about "the median font size can be 1000 times or more larger than the median Latin size"?

Reviewer: > 10,000 times larger? I don't see how that can be. I'm going to put "over 100" in as a placeholder for now, but can refine it based on data.

Good catch, the figure was indeed based on data but I was calculating a percentage. 1,834,496 * 100 / 17,660 = 10,388 %

"The TrueType or OpenType fonts used for alphabetic languages had a median size of 17,660 bytes, with a spread from 15,784 bytes (5th percentile) to 184,152 bytes (95th percentile). The median size once WOFF2 compressed was 8,360 bytes"

"The TrueType or OpenType fonts used for CJK languages had a median size of 1,834,496 bytes, with a spread from 16,832 bytes (5th percentile) to 5,524,2080 bytes (95th percentile). The median size once WOFF2 compressed was 768,492 bytes."

https://www.w3.org/TR/2020/NOTE-PFE-evaluation-20201015/#font-langtype

## Home on the (Unicode) range

Fonts increasingly have support for lots and lots of languages. Other fonts can have a large number of glyphs because the script (especially CJK) requires it. Either way can increase the file size. That's unfortunate if the web page is not in fact a multilingual dictionary, and only uses a fraction of the font's capabilities.

One older approach is for the HTML author to explicitly indicate a font subset. However, that requires deeper knowledge of the content, and risks a "ransom note" effect when the content uses characters supported by the font but not by the chosen subset. See the excellent essay [When fonts fall](https://www.figma.com/blog/when-fonts-fall/) by Marcin Wichary for lots more detail about how fallback works.

> The `unicode-range` feature is a newer approach to this problem. The font is sliced into subsets, each with a separate `@font-face` rule that indicates the Unicode coverage for that slice with a `unicode-range` descriptor. The browser then analyzes the content as part of its rendering pipeline, and downloads *only* the slices needed to render that content.

Reviewer: Unicode-range is not at all a new feature. Suggest instead "Static subsets, indicated by `unicode-range`, are a better approach to this problem".

Reviewer: Need to also point out the problem with static subsets. Suggest adding, after "that content.", the following:

"For alphabetic languages, this typically works well although it can result in poor kerning between characters in different subsets. For languages which rely on glyph shaping, such as Arabic, Urdu and many Indic languages, static subsets frequently result in broken text rendering. And for CJK, static subsets based on contiguous Unicode ranges provide almost no benefit because the characters used on a particular page are scattered almost randomly across the various subsets."

Author: These caveats are true, but it seems to me it could use a conclusion. How about: "Because of these reasons, correct and performant use of static subsets is tricky, and requires careful analysis and implementation."

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-web-font-mime-types.png",
  caption="Popular web font MIME types.",
  description="A bar chart showing the breakdown of percentage of different MIME types for serving web fonts.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=1771540678&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655527383",
  sql_file="04_10.font_formats.sql"
  )
}}

WOFF is an older, less efficient compression mechanism, but almost universally supported, accounting for an additional 11.6% of fonts served. In almost all cases (Internet Explorer 9-11 being the main exception), serving a font as WOFF is leaving performance on the table, and shows a risk of self-hosting. Even if the format choices were optimal at the time of integration, it requires extra effort to update them as browsers improve. Using a hosted service guarantees that the best format is chosen, along with all relevant optimizations.

> Ancient versions of Internet Explorer (6-8), which still make about 1.5% of global browser share, require EOT. These don't show up in the top 5 MIME formats, but are necessary for maximum compatibility.

Reviewer: I think we should be careful about still recommending that EOT is necessary for best compatibility.

Author: It seems to me that's what I wrote, but probably that's a sign I wasn't as clear as I should have been. Can you (or someone) suggest better wording?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ancient versions of Internet Explorer (6-8), which still make about 1.5% of global browser share, only support the EOT format. These don't show up in the top 5 MIME formats, but are necessary for maximum compatibility.
```

Maybe leaving out "requires" makes it less of a recommendation and more of an observation?

  description="A bar chart showing the 10 most popular web fonts.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=551344676&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655527383",
  sql_file="04_11a.popular_typeface.sql"
  )
}}

A note of caution, in determining the most popular fonts you can get different results depending on measurement methodology. The chart above is based on counting the number of pages that include an `@font-face` rule referencing the named font. That counts multiple styles only once, which arguably weights in favor of single-style fonts.

## Color fonts

Color fonts, in one form or other, are supported by most modern browsers, but usage is still close to nonexistent (a total of 755 pages total, the majority of which are in a deprecated format). No doubt part of the problem is the diversity of formats, in fact 4 in widespread use. These come in bitmap and vector flavors. The two bitmap formats are technologically very similar, but SBIX (originally a proprietary Apple format) is not supported in Firefox, while CBDT/CBLC is not supported in Safari.

> The COLR vector format is supported on all major modern browsers, but only fairly recently. The fourth format is embedding SVG in OpenType (not to be confused with SVG fonts), but not supported in Chrome or Firefox, largely because SVG is a heavyweight format and difficult to render efficiently.

Reviewer: SVG in OpenType has been supported in Firefox for **years**, so that statement should be corrected. Chrome is the only browser that doesn't support it, and plans to never support it.

Reviewer: Suggest adding, after this: "One reason for the poor support of color fonts on the web is that the colors have to be baked into the font files themselves. If you use the same typeface with three different color combinations, near-identical files have to be downloaded three times, and changng a color means reaching for a font editor."

"While there is a feature in CSS to [override or replace the color palettes in fonts](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-fonts-4/#font-palette-values), this has not yet been implemented in browsers which certainly holds back the ease of deploying color web fonts".

> The COLR vector format is supported on all major modern browsers, but only fairly recently. The fourth format is embedding SVG in OpenType (not to be confused with SVG fonts), but not supported in Chrome or Firefox, largely because SVG is a heavyweight format and difficult to render efficiently.

Reviewer: The comment about SVG being "difficult to render efficiently" is contentious and unsubstantiated, particularly for the SVG Native subset actually used for SVG in OpenType fonts. Suggest changing 

" but not supported in Chrome or Firefox, largely because SVG is a heavyweight format and difficult to render efficiently."

to

" but not supported in Chrome. One drawback of SVG in OpenType is lack of support for font variations, an increasingly important aspect of modern Web design. For this reason, the COLOR format is likely to prevail, particularly as the lack of gradient and clipping support in COLR is now being addressed."

> Generally the bitmap format has larger files and doesn’t scale as cleanly to larger sizes, but vectors only offer flat color shading (though work is ongoing to offer richer shading options in a future version).

Reviewer: Suggest changing "vectors" to "COLR", since SVG glyphs are vectors and are not limited to flat color shading.

## Variable fonts

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-font-variation-settings-usage.png",
  caption="Usage of font-variation-settings axes.",
  description="A bar chart showing the usage of the 6 most popular axes for font variation settings.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=173491049&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655527383",
  sql_file="04_17.VF_axis_value.sql"
  )
}}

Variable fonts are certainly one of the biggest stories this year. They’re seen in 8.37% of desktop pages, and 13.84% of mobile. That’s up from an average of 1.8% last year, a huge growth factor. It’s not hard to see why their popularity is increasing - they offer more design flexibility, and also potentially smaller binary font sizes, especially if multiple styles of the same font are used on the same page.

By far the most commonly used axis is `wght` (which controls weight), at 84.7% desktop and 90.4% mobile. However, `wdth` (width) accounts for approximately 5% of variable font usage. In 2020, Google Fonts began serving 2-axis fonts with both width and weight axes.

> The optical size (`opsz`) feature is used for approximately 2% of the variable font usage. This is one to watch, as tuning the appearance of a font to match its intended size of presentation improves the visual refinement in perhaps subtle but very real ways.

Reviewer: Perhaps add "Usage is also likely to increase once some current cross-browser and cross-platform uncertainties on how the optical sizes are defined are cleared up."

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-web-fonts-usage-top-countries.png",
  caption="Web fonts usage, top countries (desktop).",
  description="A chart showing the top countries by usage of web fonts, measured as median kilobytes of web font data. At the top is the Republic of Korea with 155 kilobytes followed by Turkey (117), Iran (115), Solvenia (114), Greece (111), Suadia Arabia (109), and then three countries (Australia, United States of America, and Poland) are at the bottom with 108 kilobytes each.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=705183861&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="68624087",
  sql_file="04_02.web_fonts_usage_by_country.sql"
  )
}}

There's a great thread on [web font usage by country](https://discuss.httparchive.org/t/how-does-web-font-usage-vary-by-country/1649) on the httparchive discussion forum.

### Serving with a service

> It likely comes as no surprise that Google Fonts remains by far the most popular platform, but the percentage use has actually dropped almost 5% from 2019 to about 70%. Adobe Fonts (formerly Typekit) has dropped about 3% as well, but Bootstrap usage has grown from about 3% to over 6% (in aggregate from several providers). It’s worth noting that the largest provider for Bootstrap (BootstrapCDN) also provides icon fonts from FontAwesome, so it may be that it’s not Bootstrap itself but rather older versions also referencing icon font files that is behind the rise in that source data.

Reviewer 2: I'm curious about it too, but after seeing that icon fonts were being served from the same domain, my hunch is that it's related to those somehow, either from older versions of Bootstrap or just some other common theme system referencing those icon fonts.

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=1618299142&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1485693069",
  sql_file="04_06.font_display_with_fcp.sql"
  )
}}

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-font-display-performance-mobile.png",
  caption="font-display, performance, mobile.",
  description="A bar chart showing the mobile median first content paint (FCP) and last content paint (LCP) in milliseconds for different font-display settings: `none` has a median FCP of 5,279 ms and median LCP of 8,381 ms, `optional` has 4,733 ms and 6,598 ms respectively, `swap` has 5,268 ms and 8,748 ms, `fallback` has 5,478 ms and 8,706 ms, `block` has 5,739 ms and 9,625 ms, and `auto has 6,181 ms and 10,103 ms.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=2135700957&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1485693069",
  sql_file="04_06.font_display_with_fcp.sql"
  )
}}

> There are two other interesting inferences from this data. One might expect the `block` setting to have a significant impact on FCP, especially on mobile, but in practice the effect is not that large. That suggests that waiting for font assets is seldom the "long pole in the tent" for the webpage as a whole, though it would certainly be a major. The `auto` setting (which is also what you get if you don't specify it) looks a lot like `block`; though it's technically up to the browser, [the default seems to be blocking](https://nooshu.github.io/blog/2020/02/23/improving-perceived-performance-with-the-css-font-display-property/).

Author: Right, I like the colorfulness of the phrase, but am rewriting it to be clearer, as it doesn't add too much.

> Finally, the data do not support the use of the `fallback` setting, as there is no actual empirical performance gain compared with `swap`. Fortunately, it only is used by about 1% of pages.

Author: Again, I'll just rewrite this to be clearer.

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=2028456617&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="316058576",
  sql_file="04_10.font_formats.sql"
  )
}}

WOFF is an older, less efficient compression mechanism, but almost universally supported, accounting for an additional 11.6% of fonts served. In almost all cases (Internet Explorer 9-11 being the main exception), serving a font as WOFF is leaving performance on the table, and shows a risk of self-hosting. Even if the format choices were optimal at the time of integration, it requires extra effort to update them as browsers improve. Using a hosted service guarantees that the best format is chosen, along with all relevant optimizations.

Ancient versions of Internet Explorer (6-8), which still make about 1.5% of global browser share, require EOT. These don't show up in the top 5 MIME formats, but are necessary for maximum compatibility.

> Uncompressed fonts are 2-3x larger than compressed, but still make up almost 5% of all fonts served, disproportionally on mobile. If you're serving these, it should be a red flag that optimization is possible.

Reviewer 3: Clarify what uncompressed fonts are?

```suggestion
Uncompressed fonts, like OTF and TTF files, are 2-3x larger than compressed, but still make up almost 5% of all fonts served, disproportionally on mobile. If you're serving these, it should be a red flag that optimization is possible.
```

## Popular fonts

> Icon fonts are fully half of the top 10 most popular web fonts, the rest being clean, robust sans-serif typeface designs (Roboto Slab is at #19 and Playfair Display at #28 in this ranking, for debuts of other styles, though serif designs are well represented in the tail of the distribution).

Reviewer 3: What does "fully half" mean?

Author: I was surprised that it was so many, but will change it to just "half" as I agree it's not clear.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="fonts-popular-typefaces.png",
  caption="Popular typefaces.",
  description="A bar chart showing the 10 most popular web fonts, starting with Font Awesome (35% of desktop and mobile), Open Sans (23% desktop and 25% of mobile), Roboto (17% desktop and 23% mobile), Glyphicons Halflings (16% for both), Lato (11% for both), Montserrat (19% for both), Font Awesome 5 Brands (19% for both), Font Awesome 5 Free (9% desktop and 8% mobile), Raleway (6% for both), and dashicons (6% for both).",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vT2Q4hcDGGdclJH2ym0Pp_f8JWvYur_OQFQNkuScJyO7_ZCR1KPZsewL-mEZhxcuRFcde_Mxio8z_8P/pubchart?oid=551344676&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="179750099",
  sql_file="04_11a.popular_typeface.sql",
  width="600",
  height="520"
  )
}}

A note of caution, in determining the most popular fonts you can get different results depending on measurement methodology. The chart above is based on counting the number of pages that include an `@font-face` rule referencing the named font. That counts multiple styles only once, which arguably weights in favor of single-style fonts.

## Color fonts

> Color fonts, in one form or other, are supported by most modern browsers, but usage is still close to nonexistent (a total of 755 pages total, the majority of which are in a format that is not widely supported in popular browsers). No doubt part of the problem is the diversity of formats, in fact 4 in widespread use. These come in bitmap and vector flavors. The two bitmap formats are technologically very similar, but SBIX (originally a proprietary Apple format) is not supported in Firefox, while CBDT/CBLC is not supported in Safari.

Reviewer 3: > (a total of 755 pages total, the majority of which are in a format that is not widely supported in popular browsers)

755 pages are using a color format, but not in one of the more obscure formats? Is that what this says?

Author: I'll change this to be more direct: (a total of 755 pages total, the majority of which are in SVG format, which is not supported in Chrome)

The COLR vector format is supported on all major modern browsers, but only fairly recently. The fourth format is embedding SVG in OpenType (not to be confused with SVG fonts), but not supported in Chrome. One drawback of SVG in OpenType is lack of support for font variations, an increasingly important aspect of modern Web design. For this reason, the COLR format is likely to prevail, particularly as support for gradients and clipping is being developed for a future version of COLR is.

One reason for the poor support of color fonts on the web is that the colors have to be baked into the font files themselves. If you use the same typeface with three different color combinations, near-identical files have to be downloaded three times, and changng a color means reaching for a font editor.

While there is a feature in CSS to [override or replace the color palettes in fonts](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-fonts-4/#font-palette-values), this has not yet been implemented in browsers which certainly holds back the ease of deploying color web fonts.

> Generally the bitmap format has larger files and doesn’t scale as cleanly to larger sizes, but COLR only offers flat color shading (though work is ongoing to offer richer shading options in a future version).

Reviewer 3: Already been said above, with

> particularly as support for gradients and clipping is being developed for a future version of COLR is.

Maybe leave out this paragraph altogether and add the large size argument the the paragraph discussing CBDT and sbix?

By far the most commonly used axis is `wght` (which controls weight), at 84.7% desktop and 90.4% mobile. However, `wdth` (width) accounts for approximately 5% of variable font usage. In 2020, Google Fonts began serving 2-axis fonts with both width and weight axes.

It’s worth noting that the preferred method is to use `font-weight` and `font-stretch` rather than the lower-level `font-variation-settings` syntax for these two axes as they are completely supported by all browsers that support variable fonts. By setting weight via `font-width: [number]` and width via `font-stretch: [number]%`, authors provide more appropriate style hints to the browser, which in turn enables better rendering for the end user should the variable font fail to load. This also avoids altering the normal inheritance of styles via the cascade.

> The optical size (`opsz`) feature is used for approximately 2% of the variable font usage. This is one to watch, as tuning the appearance of a font to match its intended size of presentation improves the visual refinement in perhaps subtle but very real ways. Usage is also likely to increase once some current cross-browser and cross-platform uncertainties on how the optical sizes are defined are cleared up.

Reviewer 3: Maybe worth noting that this all happens automatically, so there's nothing a developer needs to do to benefit from the feature, apart from _using_ a font with `opsz`?
